docs: document network-path considerations for long-lived subscription connections (#9318)
apollographql/router: docs/source/routing/operations/subscriptions/configuration.mdx

For more information on this multipart HTTP subscription protocol, see [this article](/router/executing-operations/subscription-multipart-protocol/).

> ## Network path considerations for client connections

Author: Placement check: this lands between the curl walkthrough (which ends "see [this article] for the multipart protocol") and the Subscription deduplication H2. That works — the curl example is the natural prompt for "what could go wrong on this connection in a real network" — but consider whether the section belongs above the curl walkthrough instead, so operators read the failure-mode context before they go troubleshoot a curl that's hanging. Worth a quick sanity check with the docs team given the in-flight overlap with `apollographql/docs-rewrite#909`. Speaking of which: that PR is listed in the test-plan checklist but the overlap isn't characterized. Worth a one-line note on what `#909` covers vs. what this section covers, so the reviewer can decide "merge both / merge one / consolidate" without having to open the other PR.

Author: Two parts here.

**On placement** — pushing back gently. Keeping the section between "Trying subscriptions with `curl`" and "Subscription deduplication" is intentional, and the round-1 rewrite leans into that placement: the buffering paragraph now refers back to the curl walkthrough as a verification step ("To verify, run the [`curl` walkthrough](#trying-subscriptions-with-curl) against the router through the same network path…"), which only works if the curl section is the most recent thing the reader saw. Moving "Network path considerations" down into Advanced configuration would also make it harder to discover for the audience that needs it most: people who are setting up subscriptions for the first time and will hit a 504 from a buffering proxy long before they hit anything that lives in Advanced configuration. If you feel strongly the section belongs lower, happy to revisit, but my read is that placement is doing real work.

**On the docs-rewrite#909 overlap** — characterized in the PR description (just updated). [#909](https://github.com/apollographql/docs-rewrite/pull/909) is an HTTP-callback best-practices page on the docs-rewrite site, targeted at subgraph publishers (auth, retries, callback URL hygiene, idempotency). This PR is a network-path section for supergraph operators on the existing router config page, scoped to the client-to-router multipart-HTTP path. Different audiences, different scenarios, no content overlap, and no contradictions to reconcile. Filing here because the section extends the existing curl walkthrough on this page.

Author: **Reviewer verdict: RESOLVED**

Agree with the author's pushback on placement. The buffering paragraph's verification step explicitly references the curl walkthrough ("run the [`curl` walkthrough](#trying-subscriptions-with-curl) against the router through the same network path"), which is materially weaker if the curl section is no longer the most recent thing the reader saw. Operators setting up subscriptions for the first time also hit 504s from buffering proxies before they reach Advanced configuration, so the current placement matches the audience that needs it. Keep it where it is.

The docs-rewrite#909 overlap is also adequately characterized in the PR description now: #909 is a subgraph-publisher HTTP-callback page on a different docs site, this section is a supergraph-operator network-path section on the existing router config page. Different audiences, no content overlap.

Safe to mark this conversation resolved. (Round-2 reviewer)

> Configure every intermediate hop between the client and the router to enable long-lived streaming responses. Subscription replies aren't one-time HTTP responses. Any proxy, CDN, gateway, or firewall that buffers responses or enforces a short idle timeout closes the connection before the client receives subscription events.

Author: The opening sentence introduces "intermediate hop" before naming what those hops are; the next sentence then enumerates them. Per the scope-up-front pattern, lead with the full set so readers know what they're scanning for. Suggest something like: "Configure every proxy, CDN, gateway, and firewall between the client and the router to enable long-lived streaming responses." That lets you drop the second-sentence enumeration without losing anything.

Author: Fixed in `d54986c`. The opener now states the scope concretely ("Configure every proxy, CDN, gateway, and firewall between the client and the router to enable long-lived streaming responses") and immediately frames _why_ this is its own section: subscription replies are a multipart stream over a held-open HTTP request, and any hop that buffers, times out short, or breaks the response path closes the stream before events reach the client. The "every hop in that path needs three things" bullet list now anchors the rest of the section.

Author: **Reviewer verdict: RESOLVED**

Verified the new opener: "Configure every proxy, CDN, gateway, and firewall between the client and the router to enable long-lived streaming responses." The full set of hops is named up front, the second sentence now explains the multipart-stream framing instead of re-enumerating, and the three-bullet "every hop in that path needs three things" list anchors the rest. Scope-up-front pattern satisfied.

Safe to mark this conversation resolved. (Round-2 reviewer)

> Configure every proxy, CDN, gateway, and firewall between the client and the router to enable long-lived streaming responses. Subscription replies aren't one-time HTTP responses. The router holds the connection open and pushes events back as a multipart stream over the same HTTP request the client opened. Any hop that buffers responses, enforces a short idle or response timeout, or silently breaks the response path closes the connection before the client receives subscription events.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
Configure every proxy, CDN, gateway, and firewall between the client and Router to enable long-lived streaming responses. Subscription replies aren't one-time HTTP responses. Router holds the connection open and pushes events back as a multipart stream over the same HTTP request the client opened. Any hop that buffers responses, enforces a short idle or response timeout, or silently breaks the response path closes the connection before the client receives subscription events.
```

Reviewer: I know it sometimes feels counterintuitive, but our style guide does recommend using "Router" as a proper noun (i.e., capitalized and with no article "the" before it).

Author: Applied in `b084b80`. Opening sentence and the rest of the bare-subject references in this section now use "Router" as a proper noun (capitalized, no article). Compound modifiers ("router-side metric event", "router-to-client boundary", "router boundary") stay hyphenated lowercase — matching the pattern in your own line-326 and line-322 suggestions. Did not apply the change outside this section, since the rest of the page still uses "the router" and the docs team likely wants a consistent sweep across the page (or the whole repo) handled as its own PR.

Author: **Reviewer verdict: RESOLVED**

Verified against `b084b80`: the opener now reads "Configure every proxy, CDN, gateway, and firewall between the client and Router to enable long-lived streaming responses. Subscription replies aren't one-time HTTP responses. Router holds the connection open and pushes events back as a multipart stream over the same HTTP request the client opened. Any hop that buffers responses, enforces a short idle or response timeout, or silently breaks the response path closes the connection before the client receives subscription events." Matches Parker's suggestion verbatim. The proper-noun rule (capitalized, no article) is applied consistently as a bare subject throughout the new section, while compound modifiers like "router-side metric event", "router-to-client boundary", and "router boundary" stay hyphenated lowercase — matching the pattern in Parker's own line-322 and line-326 suggestions. Scoping the sweep to this section only (rather than the whole page) is the right call.

Safe to mark this conversation resolved.

(Round-3 reviewer)

> A subscription request from a client takes a single HTTP POST to the router, but the router holds the connection open and pushes events back as a multipart response (or over the established WebSocket, depending on the subgraph protocol). Every hop in that path needs three things:

Author: "or over the established WebSocket, depending on the subgraph protocol" reads ambiguously; this section is about the client-to-router path, but the WebSocket parenthetical sounds like it's about that same hop. In practice the client-to-router connection is always the multipart HTTP stream described in the curl walkthrough above; the WebSocket is the router-to-subgraph hop. Suggest dropping the parenthetical entirely since this whole section is scoped to the client connection. If you want to keep it, make the boundary explicit: "(the router-to-subgraph hop may use a WebSocket; that's a separate path with its own configuration)."

Author: Fixed in `d54986c`. Dropped the WebSocket parenthetical from the opener. The section is now scoped explicitly to the multipart-HTTP subscription path between the client and the router. The WebSocket subprotocol failure modes are different (connection_init, ping/pong frames, subprotocol negotiation) and would dilute the focus of this section if mentioned in passing.

Author: **Reviewer verdict: RESOLVED**

The WebSocket parenthetical is gone from the opener. The current section is cleanly scoped to the multipart-HTTP path between client and router, and the router-to-subgraph hop is no longer mentioned in passing. No ambiguity remains.

Safe to mark this conversation resolved. (Round-2 reviewer)

- Streaming, unbuffered responses
- Idle, read, or response timeouts long enough to cover the longest subscription you support

> - A symmetric path between the router and the client

Reviewer: ```suggestion
- A symmetric path between Router and the client
```

Author: Applied in `b084b80`. Bullet now reads "A symmetric path between Router and the client."

Author: **Reviewer verdict: RESOLVED**

Verified against `b084b80`: third bullet reads "A symmetric path between Router and the client." Matches Parker's suggestion verbatim.

Safe to mark this conversation resolved.

(Round-3 reviewer)

> - Egress allowed back to the client domain

Author: "Idle timeouts long enough to cover the subscription's lifetime" is a step removed from what the operator actually configures. Most CDNs and load balancers expose distinct read/write/idle timeouts, and on some platforms the relevant knob is the response-header timeout or the connection drain timeout, not the idle timeout. Two suggestions: (1) call out idle timeout as the most common offender but acknowledge "and any equivalent read/response timeouts on each hop"; (2) reconsider tying the recommendation to `max_lifetime` (next paragraph) — `max_lifetime` defaults to no limit, so "at least the value of `max_lifetime`" is meaningless when unset and creates a soft requirement to configure `max_lifetime`. Better phrasing: "long enough to cover the longest subscription you expect to support, or `max_lifetime` if you've set one."

Author: Fixed in `d54986c`. The bullet list now reads "Idle, read, or response timeouts long enough to cover the longest subscription you support" and the prose paragraph below it covers idle / read / response / connection-drain explicitly: "any equivalent read, response, or connection-drain timeout on each hop has the same effect." Different proxies and gateways name the same setting differently, so the doc now lists the equivalents instead of betting on a single term.

Author: **Reviewer verdict: RESOLVED**

The bullet now reads "Idle, read, or response timeouts long enough to cover the longest subscription you support" and the prose paragraph explicitly covers "any equivalent read, response, or connection-drain timeout on each hop has the same effect." The wording no longer bets on a single proxy term, and the recommendation is decoupled from `max_lifetime` being set.

Safe to mark this conversation resolved. (Round-2 reviewer)

A reverse proxy that buffers the full response before forwarding it (the default for many proxies) holds subscription events until the connection is forcibly closed. The client then sees a 504 with no payload. Configure each proxy in the path to forward chunked responses without buffering.

> 

Author: "Configure each proxy in the path to forward chunked responses without buffering" tells operators what to set but not how to verify. A diagnostic sentence would round this out, e.g.: "To verify, send a `curl` subscription against the router through the same path and confirm response chunks arrive incrementally rather than in one batch at the end." That mirrors the curl walkthrough above and gives operators a concrete check before they go hunting through proxy logs.

Author: Fixed in `d54986c`. Added a verification sentence to the buffering paragraph that points back to the existing curl walkthrough: "To verify, run the [`curl` walkthrough](#trying-subscriptions-with-curl) against the router through the same network path and confirm that response chunks arrive incrementally rather than in one batch when the connection closes." That gives readers a concrete check before they open a router ticket. The internal anchor reuses the existing `## Trying subscriptions with curl` heading.

Author: **Reviewer verdict: RESOLVED**

The buffering paragraph now ends with: "To verify, run the [`curl` walkthrough](#trying-subscriptions-with-curl) against the router through the same network path and confirm that response chunks arrive incrementally rather than in one batch when the connection closes." Anchor `#trying-subscriptions-with-curl` resolves to the existing `## Trying subscriptions with curl` heading. Concrete diagnostic step is now in place.

Safe to mark this conversation resolved. (Round-2 reviewer)

> A reverse proxy that buffers the full response before forwarding it (the default for many proxies) holds subscription events until the connection is forcibly closed. The client then sees a 504 with no payload. Configure each proxy in the path to forward chunked responses without buffering. To verify, run the [`curl` walkthrough](#trying-subscriptions-with-curl) against the router through the same network path and confirm that response chunks arrive incrementally rather than in one batch when the connection closes.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
A reverse proxy that buffers the full response before forwarding it (the default for many proxies) holds subscription events until the connection is forcibly closed. The client then sees a 504 with no payload. Configure each proxy in the path to forward chunked responses without buffering. To verify, run the [`curl` walkthrough](#trying-subscriptions-with-curl) against Router through the same network path and confirm that response chunks arrive incrementally rather than in one batch when the connection closes.
```

Reviewer: Another note: Sometimes AIs fall into the trap of using passive voice. Here, for example, when we say "until the connection is forcibly closed," we should change the wording to explicitly state who or what is doing the action of closing the connection. Sometimes that isn't possible, like if many different things could cause a connection to close (in that case, we'd need to be intentionally ambiguous), but wherever it is possible, let's write explicitly.

Author: Applied in `b084b80`, with the active-voice rewrite addressed in the same edit. The buffering paragraph now reads:

> A reverse proxy that buffers the full response before forwarding it (the default for many proxies) holds subscription events instead of streaming them. When the proxy's response timeout fires, the proxy closes the connection and the client sees a 504 with no payload. Configure each proxy in the path to forward chunked responses without buffering. To verify, run the [`curl` walkthrough](#trying-subscriptions-with-curl) against Router through the same network path and confirm that response chunks arrive incrementally rather than in one batch when the connection closes.

Two sentences now carry the failure-mode description in active voice with "the proxy" as the explicit actor: the proxy holds events instead of streaming them; the proxy's response timeout fires and the proxy closes the connection. That replaces the passive "until the connection is forcibly closed." Also applied the Router-as-proper-noun fix to the curl-verification sentence.

Author: **Reviewer verdict: RESOLVED**

Verified against `b084b80`. The buffering paragraph now reads: "A reverse proxy that buffers the full response before forwarding it (the default for many proxies) holds subscription events instead of streaming them. When the proxy's response timeout fires, the proxy closes the connection and the client sees a 504 with no payload. Configure each proxy in the path to forward chunked responses without buffering. To verify, run the [`curl` walkthrough](#trying-subscriptions-with-curl) against Router through the same network path and confirm that response chunks arrive incrementally rather than in one batch when the connection closes."

This goes beyond Parker's literal suggestion by addressing the follow-up note: the passive "until the connection is forcibly closed" is replaced with two active-voice sentences using "the proxy" as the explicit actor (the proxy holds events instead of streaming them; the proxy's response timeout fires, the proxy closes the connection). Router-as-proper-noun fix is also applied to the curl verification sentence. The `#trying-subscriptions-with-curl` anchor resolves to the existing `## Trying subscriptions with curl` heading on this page.

Safe to mark this conversation resolved.

(Round-3 reviewer)

> A reverse proxy that buffers the full response before forwarding it (the default for many proxies) holds subscription events instead of streaming them. When the proxy's response timeout fires, the proxy closes the connection and the client sees a 504 with no payload. Configure each proxy in the path to forward chunked responses without buffering. To verify, run the [`curl` walkthrough](#trying-subscriptions-with-curl) against Router through the same network path and confirm that response chunks arrive incrementally rather than in one batch when the connection closes.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
A reverse proxy that buffers the full response before forwarding it (the default for many proxies) holds subscription events instead of streaming them. When the proxy's response timeout fires, the proxy closes the connection, and the client sees a 504 with no payload. Configure each proxy in the path to forward chunked responses without buffering. To verify, run the [`curl` walkthrough](#trying-subscriptions-with-curl) against Router through the same network path and confirm that response chunks arrive incrementally rather than in one batch when the connection closes.
```

Idle timeouts shorter than the subscription's lifetime close the client connection before any keepalive or heartbeat arrives. The default on most CDNs and load balancers is 30 to 60 seconds. For subscriptions intended to run for minutes or hours, extend the idle timeout on every hop to at least the [`max_lifetime` configuration value](#limit-subscription-lifetime).

> 

Author: As written, the recommendation reads "extend the idle timeout on every hop to at least the `max_lifetime` configuration value." `max_lifetime` defaults to no limit (per the docs further down on this page), so this is undefined when operators haven't set it. The advice also implies operators must set a finite `max_lifetime` to satisfy this rule, which isn't a documented requirement elsewhere. Suggest reframing to make `max_lifetime` an upper bound rather than a target: "Set the idle timeout on every hop to be longer than the longest subscription you support. If you've set [`max_lifetime`](#limit-subscription-lifetime), use that value as the floor."

Author: Good catch, fixed in `d54986c`. The previous wording was undefined for most readers because `max_lifetime` defaults to no limit. The rule is now: "Set every relevant timeout to be longer than the longest subscription you support. If you've set [`max_lifetime`](#limit-subscription-lifetime), use that value as the floor." That gives operators who haven't set `max_lifetime` an actionable rule (the longest subscription they actually support), and treats `max_lifetime` as a floor only when it's actually configured.

Author: **Reviewer verdict: RESOLVED**

Reframing is correct: "Set every relevant timeout to be longer than the longest subscription you support. If you've set [`max_lifetime`](#limit-subscription-lifetime), use that value as the floor." This gives an actionable rule when `max_lifetime` is unset (the default) and treats it as a floor only when configured. Anchor `#limit-subscription-lifetime` resolves correctly.

Safe to mark this conversation resolved. (Round-2 reviewer)

> 

Author: "The default on most CDNs and load balancers is 30 to 60 seconds" — this ballpark is roughly right for AWS ALB (60s default idle), CloudFront (60s response-timeout cap on standard distributions), and nginx (60s `proxy_read_timeout` default). It's wrong for Azure Front Door (240s) and GCP Cloud Load Balancer (30s on classic, but configurable up to ~24 hours on global external). Two options: (1) keep the range and add "varies by provider"; (2) drop the specific range and say "often a minute or less." The current wording risks readers checking against their actual CDN docs and losing trust in the section.

Author: Fair, fixed in `d54986c`. The 30-60s ballpark was too narrow: Azure Front Door defaults to 240s, GCP global load balancers go up to 24h, and several enterprise-tier CDNs sit between those. Replaced the figure with "Defaults vary widely by provider (often a minute or less, but some platforms default higher), so check each hop's documentation rather than relying on a global rule." That keeps the directional point (defaults are usually too short) without putting a number on it that some readers would have to discount.

Author: **Reviewer verdict: RESOLVED**

The 30-60s ballpark is gone. Replaced with: "Defaults vary widely by provider (often a minute or less, but some platforms default higher), so check each hop's documentation rather than relying on a global rule." This holds up against Azure Front Door (240s), GCP global LB (configurable to 24h), AWS ALB (60s), and CloudFront (60s) without giving any reader cause to discount the figure.

Safe to mark this conversation resolved. (Round-2 reviewer)

> The most common timeout offender is the idle timeout, but any equivalent read, response, or connection-drain timeout on each hop has the same effect. Defaults vary widely by provider (often a minute or less, but some platforms default higher), so check each hop's documentation rather than relying on a global rule. Set every relevant timeout to be longer than the longest subscription you support. If you've set [`max_lifetime`](#limit-subscription-lifetime), use that value as the floor.

Reviewer: For the claim that "The most common timeout offender is the idle timeout," do we have the data to back that up? In general, let's avoid sweeping language like "most" and go with language that hedges our bets better: "A common timeout offender . . ."

Author: Fair point, applied in `b084b80`. Changed "The most common timeout offender is the idle timeout" to "A common timeout offender is the idle timeout." I don't have hard data behind "most" — it's an impression from supporting customer 504 investigations, not a measurement, so hedging is the right call.

Author: **Reviewer verdict: RESOLVED**

Verified against `b084b80`: the paragraph now opens "A common timeout offender is the idle timeout, but any equivalent read, response, or connection-drain timeout on each hop has the same effect." Sweeping "most" claim is gone; the wording now leaves room for the read/response/connection-drain variants that follow in the same sentence.

Safe to mark this conversation resolved.

(Round-3 reviewer)

When a corporate firewall or VPC security group restricts egress, the router still accepts the subscription request but can't push events back to the client. Clients see a 504 timeout with no diagnostic information at the router level. Verify that the path from the router back to the client domain is open for streaming responses.

> 

Author: "The router still accepts the subscription request but can't push events back to the client" reads as if egress restrictions are something the router would observe and surface. In reality, blocked egress to a client is rare; the more common failure is blocked ingress to the router, or an asymmetric path through a corporate proxy. Worth either tightening the wording ("egress from the router back to the client is uncommon as a primary cause; the more typical case is..."), or rolling this paragraph into the broader idle-timeout/buffering section since the diagnostic is the same (no `terminated.client` event).

Author: Agreed, fixed in `d54986c`. Outbound egress blocks back to the client domain are rare in practice. The realistic failure mode this paragraph was trying to capture is _path asymmetry_: corporate firewalls, VPC security groups, or asymmetric routing policies that allow the inbound subscription request but break the response stream on the way back. The paragraph now reads:

> When a corporate firewall, VPC security group, or asymmetric routing policy breaks the path between the router and the client, the router accepts the subscription request but the response stream may not return to the client. The diagnostic looks identical to a buffering or timeout failure (504 at the client with no router-side metric event). Include path-asymmetry checks in your investigation when the simpler causes don't pan out.

The third bullet in the upfront list also became "A symmetric path between the router and the client" to match.

Author: **Reviewer verdict: RESOLVED**

Reframed correctly. The paragraph now identifies path asymmetry (corporate firewall, VPC security group, asymmetric routing policy) as the realistic failure mode rather than implausible egress blocks back to the client. The third upfront bullet was updated to match ("A symmetric path between the router and the client"). The diagnostic note about the failure looking identical to buffering or timeout is a useful addition.

Safe to mark this conversation resolved. (Round-2 reviewer)

> A common timeout offender is the idle timeout, but any equivalent read, response, or connection-drain timeout on each hop has the same effect. Defaults vary widely by provider (often a minute or less, but some platforms default higher), so check each hop's documentation rather than relying on a global rule. Set every relevant timeout to be longer than the longest subscription you support. If you've set [`max_lifetime`](#limit-subscription-lifetime), use that value as the floor.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
A common timeout issue is the idle timeout, but any equivalent read, response, or connection-drain timeout on each hop has the same effect. Defaults vary widely by provider (often a minute or less, but some platforms default higher), so check each hop's documentation rather than relying on a global rule. Set every relevant timeout to be longer than the longest subscription you support. If you've set [`max_lifetime`](#limit-subscription-lifetime), use that value as the lowest value.
```

If clients receive 504 errors on subscriptions and the [`apollo.router.operations.subscriptions.terminated.client` metric](#tracking-subgraph-connection-failures-and-closures) doesn't show a corresponding event, an intermediary is dropping the connection, not the router. Check the proxy, gateway, and firewall logs first. The router can't record a client disconnect it never observed.

> 

Author: This is the load-bearing diagnostic in the section, and the claim is correct as stated: the router can only emit `terminated.client` for disconnects it observed on the active stream. Worth strengthening with a positive-case sentence too — when the metric *does* fire (with `reason=heartbeat_delivery_failed` or `client_disconnect`), the disconnect is at the router-to-client boundary, not at an intermediary. That gives operators both halves of the diagnostic instead of just the absence-of-signal half.

Author: Fixed in `d54986c`. The metric paragraph now spells out both branches:

> Use the [`apollo.router.operations.subscriptions.terminated.client`](#tracking-subgraph-connection-failures-and-closures) metric as the primary diagnostic split. When the metric fires for the failing subscription (with `reason=heartbeat_delivery_failed` or `client_disconnect`), the router observed the disconnect itself. The failure is at the router-to-client boundary or on the client. When the metric does not fire and the client still saw a 504, an intermediary closed the connection without the router seeing it. Check the proxy, gateway, and firewall logs first.

So the reader gets an actionable next step regardless of which way the metric goes, instead of having "absence of signal" be the only diagnostic mentioned.

Author: **Reviewer verdict: RESOLVED**

Both branches of the `terminated.client` metric are now documented: fires (with `reason=heartbeat_delivery_failed` or `client_disconnect`) means the disconnect is at the router-to-client boundary or on the client; doesn't fire plus a 504 at the client means an intermediary closed the connection silently. Operators get an actionable next step in either direction. The metric name `apollo.router.operations.subscriptions.terminated.client` and its anchor `#tracking-subgraph-connection-failures-and-closures` are correct.

Safe to mark this conversation resolved. (Round-2 reviewer)

> When a corporate firewall, VPC security group, or asymmetric routing policy breaks the path between the router and the client, the router accepts the subscription request but the response stream may not return to the client. The diagnostic looks identical to a buffering or timeout failure (504 at the client with no router-side metric event). Include path-asymmetry checks in your investigation when the simpler causes don't pan out.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
When a corporate firewall, VPC security group, or asymmetric routing policy breaks the path between the router and the client, the router accepts the subscription request, but the response stream might not return to the client. The diagnostic looks identical to a buffering or timeout failure (504 at the client with no router-side metric event). Include path-asymmetry checks in your investigation when you can't identify more common causes.
```

Author: Applied your suggestion in `b084b80`, plus the Router-as-proper-noun fix from your earlier comment. The paragraph now reads:

> When a corporate firewall, VPC security group, or asymmetric routing policy breaks the path between Router and the client, Router accepts the subscription request, but the response stream might not return to the client. The diagnostic looks identical to a buffering or timeout failure (504 at the client with no router-side metric event). Include path-asymmetry checks in your investigation when you can't identify more common causes.

Changes from your suggestion: comma before contrasting "but", "may not" → "might not", and "the simpler causes don't pan out" → "you can't identify more common causes." "router-side metric event" stays hyphenated lowercase since it's a compound modifier.

Author: **Reviewer verdict: RESOLVED**

Verified against `b084b80`. The paragraph now reads: "When a corporate firewall, VPC security group, or asymmetric routing policy breaks the path between Router and the client, Router accepts the subscription request, but the response stream might not return to the client. The diagnostic looks identical to a buffering or timeout failure (504 at the client with no router-side metric event). Include path-asymmetry checks in your investigation when you can't identify more common causes."

All three changes from Parker's suggestion block are picked up: comma before contrasting "but", "may" → "might", and "the simpler causes don't pan out" → "you can't identify more common causes." Router-as-proper-noun fix is layered in correctly; "router-side metric event" stays hyphenated lowercase as a compound modifier.

Safe to mark this conversation resolved.

(Round-3 reviewer)

> When a corporate firewall, VPC security group, or asymmetric routing policy breaks the path between Router and the client, Router accepts the subscription request, but the response stream might not return to the client. The diagnostic looks identical to a buffering or timeout failure (504 at the client with no router-side metric event). Include path-asymmetry checks in your investigation when you can't identify more common causes.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
When a corporate firewall, VPC security group, or asymmetric routing policy disrupts the path between Router and the client, Router accepts the subscription request, but the response stream might not return to the client. The diagnostic looks identical to a buffering or timeout failure (504 at the client with no router-side metric event). Include path-asymmetry checks in your investigation when you can't identify more common causes.
```

When all hops are configured to enable streaming responses and the idle timeouts cover the expected subscription lifetime, subscription events flow end-to-end without 504s.

> 

Author: The closing sentence works as the back half of a recommendation-sandwich, but it's pure restatement of the opener. Consider replacing with a slightly more actionable closer that pivots to the metric, e.g.: "If 504s persist after every hop is configured for streaming and timeouts cover the expected lifetime, check the [`apollo.router.operations.subscriptions.terminated.client`](#tracking-subgraph-connection-failures-and-closures) metric to confirm whether the disconnect is happening at the router or upstream of it." That keeps the sandwich shape but earns the second half.

Author: Fixed in `d54986c`. Replaced the restated-recommendation closer with a metric-pivoting one:

> If 504s persist after every hop is configured for streaming and timeouts cover the expected lifetime, the metric tells you which side of the router boundary to investigate next.

This treats the section like an investigation guide instead of repeating the headline. The earlier paragraph supplies the metric's two branches (fires → router-to-client boundary or client; doesn't fire → intermediary), so the closer is doing the work of pointing the reader at "what to do once you've already configured everything you can."

Author: **Reviewer verdict: RESOLVED**

The new closer earns its place: "If 504s persist after every hop is configured for streaming and timeouts cover the expected lifetime, the metric tells you which side of the router boundary to investigate next." It pivots to the diagnostic instead of restating the headline, and the preceding paragraph already supplies the metric's two branches so the closer doesn't need to re-explain them.

Safe to mark this conversation resolved. (Round-2 reviewer)

> Use the [`apollo.router.operations.subscriptions.terminated.client`](#tracking-subgraph-connection-failures-and-closures) metric as the primary diagnostic split. When the metric fires for the failing subscription (with `reason=heartbeat_delivery_failed` or `client_disconnect`), the router observed the disconnect itself. The failure is at the router-to-client boundary or on the client. When the metric does not fire and the client still saw a 504, an intermediary closed the connection without the router seeing it. Check the proxy, gateway, and firewall logs first.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
Use the [`apollo.router.operations.subscriptions.terminated.client`](#tracking-subgraph-connection-failures-and-closures) metric as the primary diagnostic split. When the metric fires for the failing subscription (with `reason=heartbeat_delivery_failed` or `client_disconnect`), the router has observed the disconnect itself. The failure is at the router-to-client boundary or on the client. When the metric doesn't fire and the client still sees a 504, an intermediary might have closed the connection without the router seeing it. Check the proxy, gateway, and firewall logs first.
```

Author: Applied your suggestion in `b084b80`, with the Router-as-proper-noun fix layered in. The metric paragraph now reads:

> Use the [`apollo.router.operations.subscriptions.terminated.client`](#tracking-subgraph-connection-failures-and-closures) metric as the primary diagnostic split. When the metric fires for the failing subscription (with `reason=heartbeat_delivery_failed` or `client_disconnect`), Router has observed the disconnect itself. The failure is at the router-to-client boundary or on the client. When the metric doesn't fire and the client still sees a 504, an intermediary might have closed the connection without Router seeing it. Check the proxy, gateway, and firewall logs first.

Picked up your changes: "observed" → "has observed", "does not" → "doesn't", "saw" → "sees", and the "might have closed" hedge. "router-to-client boundary" stays hyphenated lowercase as a compound modifier.

Author: **Reviewer verdict: RESOLVED**

Verified against `b084b80`. The metric paragraph now reads: "Use the [`apollo.router.operations.subscriptions.terminated.client`](#tracking-subgraph-connection-failures-and-closures) metric as the primary diagnostic split. When the metric fires for the failing subscription (with `reason=heartbeat_delivery_failed` or `client_disconnect`), Router has observed the disconnect itself. The failure is at the router-to-client boundary or on the client. When the metric doesn't fire and the client still sees a 504, an intermediary might have closed the connection without Router seeing it. Check the proxy, gateway, and firewall logs first."

All four changes from Parker's suggestion block are present: "observed" → "has observed" (present perfect), "does not" → "doesn't" (contraction), "saw" → "sees" (present tense), and "closed" → "might have closed" (hedge). Router-as-proper-noun fix layered in correctly; "router-to-client boundary" stays hyphenated lowercase. The `#tracking-subgraph-connection-failures-and-closures` anchor resolves to the existing heading later on this page.

Safe to mark this conversation resolved.

(Round-3 reviewer)

> If 504s persist after every hop is configured for streaming and timeouts cover the expected lifetime, the metric tells you which side of the router boundary to investigate next.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
If 504s persist after you have configured every hop for streaming and made sure the timeouts cover the expected lifetime, the metric tells you which side of the router boundary to investigate next.
```

Author: Applied your suggestion in `b084b80`. Closer now reads: "If 504s persist after you have configured every hop for streaming and made sure the timeouts cover the expected lifetime, the metric tells you which side of the router boundary to investigate next." Active voice with explicit "you" as the actor. "router boundary" stays lowercase as a compound modifier, matching the pattern in your suggestion.

Author: **Reviewer verdict: RESOLVED**

Verified against `b084b80`: the closing sentence reads "If 504s persist after you have configured every hop for streaming and made sure the timeouts cover the expected lifetime, the metric tells you which side of the router boundary to investigate next." Matches Parker's suggestion verbatim. Active voice with "you" as the explicit actor; "router boundary" stays hyphenated lowercase as a compound modifier.

Safe to mark this conversation resolved.

(Round-3 reviewer)

> If 504s persist after you have configured every hop for streaming and made sure the timeouts cover the expected lifetime, the metric tells you which side of the router boundary to investigate next.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
If 504s persist after you have configured every hop for streaming and made sure the timeouts cover the expected lifetime, the metric tells you what side of the router boundary to investigate next.
```
